SUMMARY
This is AI generated summarization, which may have errors. For context, always refer to the full article.
Claim: Former senator Ramon “Bong” Revilla Jr. directly accused Vice President Sara Duterte of being the mastermind behind corruption in the government’s flood control projects.
Rating: FALSE
Why we fact-checked this: Two YouTube videos uploaded by “Trending Pinas News” on January 22 and January 31, used the hashtag #vpsara and featured thumbnails showing images of Revilla and Duterte.
One of the videos was titled: “Kakapasok lang! VP Sara Duterte, yari iyak na; Bong Revilla nilaglag ang VP.” (Just in! VP [Sara]Duterte in trouble, crying now, Bong Revilla exposed the VP.)
The other was titled, “Kakapasok lang! VP Sara Duterte, nagulat, kinanta na ni Bong Revilla utak sa flood control korapsyon.” (Just in! VP Sara Duterte shocked, Bong Revilla revealed the mastermind in flood control corruption.)
In one of the videos, the video’s narrator alleges that Revilla supposedly stated, “Kung lulubog ako, damay-damay na! (If I go down, everyone will go down with me!) and implicated Duterte in the issue.
The first video garnered 5,369 views and 170 likes, while the second received 6,442 views and 109 likes as of writing.
The videos emerged after Revilla surrendered to authorities following the release of an arrest warrant against him and others for a ghost flood control project in Bulacan.
The facts: The former senator did not name the Vice President as the alleged mastermind behind the flood control corruption scandal. No credible news outlet has reported such a statement from him, and there are no public records or posts on Revilla’s official Facebook page about his alleged statement.
Vera Files has also debunked the claim and reported that it originated from a fake graphic posted on TikTok that used the logo and branding of GMA News. GMA News has also debunked the graphic, warning the public to “be cautious and discerning about fake news” and to avoid spreading it on social media.
In his actual public statement via Facebook before surrendering on January 19, Revilla spoke only about his own case. He expressed frustration over what he called the “lack of due process” that led to the issuance of the arrest warrant and hold departure order against him.
“Haharapin ko ‘to ng walang takot at alam kong hindi ako pababayaan ng Diyos dahil wala po akong kasalanan dito,“ he added.
(I will face this without fear and I know God will not forsake me because I am innocent.)
At no point in the video did Revilla mention Duterte or accuse her of involvement in the flood control scandal.
Back behind bars: Revilla is currently detained at the Quezon City Jail in Payatas, where he is facing charges of graft and malversation of funds over a P92.8-million flood control project in Pandi, Bulacan, that was never completed. This is his second time facing a non-bailable corruption charge, more than a decade since he was jailed — and later acquitted — for his involvement in the pork barrel scandal. (WATCH: Bong Revilla and his corruption cases: From PDAF to flood control)
The flood control corruption scandal has ensnared several lawmakers and public works officials. Some contractors from the Duterte administration and even a member of the Duterte family, Davao City 1st District Representative Paolo Duterte, have been named in the flood control issue, but the Vice President herself has not been directly implicated in the controversy. – Cyril Bocar/Rappler.com
Efren Cyril Bocar is a journalist from Llorente, Eastern Samar who graduated with a degree in English Language Studies at the Visayas State University. Cyril is also a graduate of the Aries Rufo Journalism Fellowship of Rappler for 2024.
Keep us aware of suspicious Facebook pages, groups, accounts, websites, articles, or photos in your network by contacting us at factcheck@rappler.com. Let us battle disinformation one Fact Check at a time.
How does this make you feel?