SUMMARY
This is AI generated summarization, which may have errors. For context, always refer to the full article.
Claim: Government authorities are preparing for a possible lockdown in the Philippines due to a potential Nipah virus outbreak.
Rating: FALSE
Why we fact-checked this: A Facebook post bearing the claim was posted on February 1 and has since received over 2,400 reactions, 1,200 comments, and 1,300 shares.
The post’s caption reads: “Isinasalang-alang ng ilang awtoridad ang posibleng pagpapatupad ng lockdown o mahigpit na paghihigpit sa galaw sa mga susunod na araw bilang hakbang sa paghahanda at pag-iingat laban sa Nipah virus, isang sakit na patuloy na binabantayan ng mga health expert sa iba’t ibang bansa.”
(Authorities are considering the possible implementation of a lockdown or strict travel restrictions in the coming days as a preparatory and precautionary measure against the Nipah virus, a disease that health experts from various countries are continuing to monitor.)
The Facebook page, “Serbisyong Totoo: May Malasakit,” which uploaded the claim, has over 427,000 followers and consistently shares content claiming to provide official updates on government subsidies and social issues, such as virus outbreaks and typhoons.
The page also carries a blue checkmark from Meta — a badge that was once reserved for verified public figures and official accounts before Meta introduced monthly subscriptions in 2023.
The facts: The Department of Health (DOH) confirmed on Wednesday, February 4, that there are no active cases of the Nipah virus in the Philippines.
“Walang mga internasyonal na rekomendasyon para sa mga paghihigpit sa paglalakbay (There are no international recommendations for travel restrictions),” DOH spokesperson Assistant Secretary Albert Domingo said, according to a GMA News report.
The DOH assured the public that border surveillance and screening protocols are in place to prevent the virus from entering and spreading in the country. (READ: Nipah virus spreads in India. Should PH tighten borders?)
The agency also emphasized that heightened awareness, rather than travel restrictions, is recommended in response to the Nipah virus threat.
“Ang DOH Bureau of Quarantine ay nananatiling mapagmatyag at inirerekomenda ang mas mataas na kamalayan sa halip na paghihigpit sa paggalaw ng mga manlalakbay. Sa pamamagitan ng pagtuon sa pagtuturo sa publiko at pagtiyak na handa ang mga frontliner ng paliparan at daungan, ang DOH BOQ sa pakikipagtulungan sa iba pang mga kasosyo sa kalusugan ay makakatulong na maiwasan ang pagpasok at pagkalat ng anumang potensyal na banta ng sakit,” Domingo added.
(The DOH Bureau of Quarantine (BOQ) remains vigilant and recommends increased awareness instead of restricting the movement of travelers. By focusing on public education and ensuring the preparedness of frontliners at airports and seaports, the DOH BOQ, in coordination with other health partners, can help prevent the entry and spread of any potential disease threats.)
Nipah virus: The false claim circulated following reports of a Nipah virus outbreak that began in West Bengal State, India, in December 2025. Indian health authorities, however, said they have contained the outbreak.
According to the World Health Organization, the Nipah virus is a zoonotic virus transmitted to humans from animals, contaminated food, or through direct person-to-person contact.
Individuals who contract the virus exhibit a wide range of symptoms, including fever, headache, muscle pain (myalgia), vomiting, and sore throat. Some cases may be asymptomatic, meaning the infected person shows no signs or symptoms of the disease.
While the Nipah virus is not highly transmissible, it is exceptionally lethal, with an estimated case fatality rate of 40% to 75%.
Debunked: Rappler has previously debunked several false claims regarding alleged health emergencies in the Philippines:
- FACT CHECK: No DepEd notice of class suspensions due to Nipah virus
- FACT CHECK: No confirmed Nipah virus case in PH — DOH
- FACT CHECK: No class, work suspensions because of ‘super flu’ outbreak
- FACT CHECK: No flu outbreak causing lockdown, mandatory face mask use
- FACT CHECK: Circulating list of areas under lockdown due to flu-like cases is fake
– Reinnard Balonzo/Rappler.com
Keep us aware of suspicious Facebook pages, groups, accounts, websites, articles, or photos in your network by contacting us at factcheck@rappler.com. Let us battle disinformation one Fact Check at a time.
How does this make you feel?