Newchecker.in is an independent fact-checking initiative of NC Media Networks Pvt. Ltd. We welcome our readers to send us claims to fact check. If you believe a story or statement deserves a fact check, or an error has been made with a published fact check
Contact Us: [email protected]
English
Claim
Monarchy supporters celebrate the government’s readiness to reinstate monarchy.
Fact
Viral video shows an old clip from March, 2025, when the former monarch’s supporters greeted him upon his arrival from a trip to western Nepal.
A video showing the supporters of former King Gyanendra Shah allegedly celebrating the news of the government’s readiness to reinstate monarchy in the country is going viral on TikTok.
TikTok user @sijan.thapa556 posted a video showing a huge crowd of monarchy supporters swarming the vehicle of former King Gyanendra Shah while the latter stands out from the sunroof of his car to greet the people. Text superimposed on the video reads, “Hot News: People in celebration after the government agreed to reinstate monarchy, how the celebration will be on the actual day of restoring monarchy.”
The video posted on January 17 has garnered 7393 likes, 394 users have it and 427 people have commented until the last count. The archived version of the TikTok video can be seen here.
Newschecker found the claim to be misleading.
To check the veracity of the claim, Newschecker searched for news regarding the government’s agreement to reinstate monarchy. However, the search didn’t yield any relevant results. Rather we found news reports ( See here, here and here) about of an agreement between the government and Durga Prasain—the coordinator of the campaign for—Rastra, Rashtriyata, Dharma, Sanskriti Bachau Abhiyan (Campaign to Save the Nation, Nationalism, Religion, and Culture).
According to the agreement, the government has decided to form a “High-Level Constitutional Amendment Recommendation Commission” to study necessary constitutional and legal reforms and submit recommendations to address the demands raised by Prasain including restoration of monarchy and Hindu state incorporating Kirat and Buddhist religions.
However, we could not find any credible news of recent celebrations by pro-monarchy supporters.
We then split the video into several key frames and ran reverse searches on them. A Google reverse search on a frame led us to several posts carrying photos resembling the frame from the viral video.
On checking a photo, posted on a Facebook account named Sajha.com, we found a close resemblance with a key-frame from the viral video. The photo was posted on March 9, 2025, thus indicating that the post was from March 2025 when the King was accorded a grand welcome in Kathmandu upon his arrival from western Nepal.
Further, we checked an article, dated March 9, 2025, featuring photos of the grand welcome to the deposed King by a rally of supporters. The photos carried in the article published on My Republica also matched the frames from the viral video. Thousands of supporters had gathered outside Kathmandu airport to welcome Shah when he arrived from his recent visit to west Nepal.
We also watched a video posted on the YouTube channel of Onlinekhabar showing the gathering of monarchy supporters to welcome the former king in Kathmandu in March 2025 and found that the video matched the viral video.
However, we could not find the original video matching the viral clip.
Thus, our findings indicated that the viral video is from March 2025 when the monarchy supporters gathered to welcome the ex-King in Kathmandu.
No, the viral video doesn’t show the monarchy supporters celebrating after the government agreed to reinstate monarchy. The viral video actually shows an old clip from March 2025 when pro-monarchy supporters welcomed the former king in Kathmandu. Thus, the video is misleading.
Sources
My Republica, March 9, 2025
Onlinekhabar/YouTube, March 9, 2025
Sajha.com/Facebook, March 9, 2025
Spotlight, Jan 17, 2026
Sanjeeb Phuyal
February 14, 2026
Sanjeeb Phuyal
February 14, 2026
Sanjeeb Phuyal
February 7, 2026