Newchecker.in is an independent fact-checking initiative of NC Media Networks Pvt. Ltd. We welcome our readers to send us claims to fact check. If you believe a story or statement deserves a fact check, or an error has been made with a published fact check
Contact Us: checkthis@newschecker.in
Fact Check
A video claims to show a massive ruckus in the Iranian parliament with members appearing to sing a popular Oasis song, amid nationwide anti-government protests in the country.
Also Read: Video of Shivling Falsely Shared As Indians Worshipping A Nuclear Warhead
A reverse image search of three keyframes from the viral clip led us to a report by The Telegraph, dated January 5, 2020. Carrying the same visuals, the report stated that members of Iran’s 290-seat parliament stood up in the chamber and chanted “Death to America” to protest the killing of Iranian General Qassem Soleimani by the US. While the visuals match, the audio in the viral clip is different.
We also found a Sky News report dated January 5, 2020, whose logo is visible in the viral video, carrying the same footage, but with a different audio, while stating, “Iranian MPs unanimously chanted “death to America” in the chamber to protest against Soleimani’s assassination by the US.”
Multiple other outlets, such as this, this and this, reported on the same.
Further, a YouTube video titled “England Fans Singing Don’t Look Back in Anger Ahead of Kick-Off Tonight” (dated June 14, 2017) carries audio which appears to be similar to that heard in the viral clip.
We also came across multiple news reports from June 14-15, 2017, seen here, here and here, stating that in an emotional show of support for the victims of terror attacks in Manchester and London, France and England players walked out to the sound of “Don’t Look Back in Anger” from Oasis moments before a friendly match at Stade de France. However, we could not independently verify the exact source of the audio in the viral clip.
Also Read: Did Rajnath Singh Link RSS To Delhi Blast? No, Video Is Doctored
Hence, we could conclude that the viral posts, alleging to show ruckus in the Iranian Parliament amid the anti-establishment protests, are misleading.
Sources
YouTube Video By The Telegraph, Dated January 5, 2020
Report By Sky News, Dated January 5, 2020
JP Tripathi
February 20, 2026
Salman
February 17, 2026
Vasudha Beri
February 17, 2026