Quick Take
According to a social media post “Turmeric consumption removes fluoride from the brain”. According to our findings, the research on turmeric’s use against harmful effects of fluoride is insufficient to make such an assertion. Thus, the claim is Mostly False.
The Claim
As per a Facebook post titled “Turmeric removes fluoride from the brain”. Curcumin, which is found in turmeric, exhibits a major antioxidant defense system by increasing glutathione production in the brain, which eliminates fluoride from the human brain.
Fact Check
What are the harmful effects of fluoride on the central nervous system?
Fluoride is an ionic form of fluorine that occurs naturally in water and air. Fluoride is a trace element that is necessary, but too much of it can be harmful. Thus, excessive sodium fluoride (NaF) consumption through food, water, toothpaste, and other sources may have negative effects on the human body.
It should be noted that prolonged exposure could harm body tissues, especially the nervous system. Fluoride administration to pregnant women on a regular basis can have negative consequences for their babies. This is due to fluoride’s ability to cross the placenta and the fetus’ blood-brain barrier and impair brain development by altering brain tissue morphology, neuron ultrastructure, and neurotransmitter content. Furthermore, excessive fluoride can impair brain function, lowering children’s Intelligence Quotient (IQ), cognition, memory, and locomotor behavior.
When we asked Neurologist Dr. Abhishek Juneja, if fluoride could harm the central nervous system, he said that, “Fluoride toxicity is known to cause neurodevelopmental side effects in developing brains, including cognitive dysfunction. This is due to the accumulation of this neurotoxin in certain areas of the brain. Thus, a diet high in antioxidants aids in the detoxification of such body tissues.
Is turmeric capable of removing fluorides from the brain?
No, there is no substantial evidence to prove that. Curcumin is a yellow pigment derived from turmeric that has anti-carcinogenic, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory characteristics. Many significant studies have been mentioned as a result of these characteristics. One such study on rats found that curcumin treatment for prolonged fluoride exposure benefits the brain, behavior patterns, and cognition. And the other rat study validated its neuroprotective ability against sodium-fluoride-induced brain stress. As a result, the majority of these studies support its neuroprotective potential. Regardless, more research is required. Hence, the role of curcumin in reversing fluoride toxicities is unclear.
How can excessive fluoride exposure be avoided?
Please keep in mind that there is no definitive cure for the negative effects of fluoride exposure. These conditions include both skeletal and dental fluorosis. However, limiting fluoride intake could effectively prevent the condition. Among them are drinking safe water, promoting nutrition, and avoiding fluoride-rich foods.
THIP MEDIA TAKE: Although turmeric is considered an effective nutritional supplement with various disease-preventing characteristics, the mechanism of its functionality is less likely to be precise. Moreover, the evidence to date does not support the possibility of turmeric eliminating fluoride from the brain. Furthermore, when rats were tested, it was discovered that when exposed to fluoride, it acts as a neuroprotective agent on the brain rather than completely removing it. Thus, based on our analysis, we have classified this claim as mostly false.
Disclaimer: Medical Science is an ever evolving field. We strive to keep this page updated. In case you notice any discrepancy in the content, please inform us at [email protected]. You can futher read our Correction Policy here. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay seeking medical treatment because of something you have read on or accessed through this website or it's social media channels. Read our Full Disclaimer Here for further information.