WHAT WAS CLAIMED
The government will cover the cost of installing solar panels and batteries for households in eligible NSW postcodes.
OUR VERDICT
False. Government rebates do not cover the entire cost and eligibility isn't determined by postcode
AAP FACTCHECK - The government will not cover the full cost of installing solar panels or battery systems for NSW homeowners, despite claims in Facebook ads.
The ads, which are being shared by several Facebook pages, claim the government will bear the expense for systems of those living in "eligible postcodes".
However, rebates available in NSW don't cover the full cost, requiring homeowners to pay the rest either upfront or by taking out a loan, which will need to be repaid.
Available rebates also don't specify postcodes in the eligibility criteria.
One of the ads claims the government "will cover the cost to install solar if you own a home in these postcodes".
Another ad makes the same claim for batteries.
"The NSW battery rebate won't be around forever. Claim your rebate on solar battery this year and start saving hundreds on your energy bills annually," it says.
Many ads also feature videos of people talking about the supposed schemes, however they appear to be avatars generated by artificial intelligence, as their mouth movements don't match the audio.
AAP FactCheck contacted the Facebook pages behind the claims for evidence, but did not receive a response.
The claims are false. The NSW government has ceased its general rebate schemes for solar and battery systems.
The state government does still provide limited support for upgrades to apartment blocks, however individual homeowners aren't eligible and the scheme only covers up to 50 per cent of the installation costs.
"No broadscale incentives are available from NSW Government for solar. Incentives to install a battery energy storage system were available between November 2024 and June 2025, but were suspended due to the introduction of the Commonwealth Cheaper Home Batteries Program," a NSW government spokesperson said.
"There may be providers out there offering no-up-front cost solar battery packages, but these would likely be through a leasing or financing arrangement not managed by the Government."
Federal rebates are available in NSW and include the Small-scale Renewable Energy Scheme and the Cheaper Home Batteries Program.
The Clean Energy Regulator (CER) has previously told AAP FactCheck that these typically cover about 30 per cent of installation costs and not the entire cost.
"Our understanding is stacking these incentives would not result in no net cost systems; however, they may become heavily discounted," a CER spokesperson told AAP FactCheck.
Even in a scenario where an owners corporation in NSW obtains a 50 per cent rebate for a solar system in an apartment block and this is combined with a federal rebate, the full cost still won't be covered.
The Facebook ads typically link to an external web page from which users are prompted to enter their personal details.
AAP FactCheck has previously debunked ads making similar claims about solar rebates.
AAP FactCheck is an accredited member of the International Fact-Checking Network. To keep up with our latest fact checks, follow us on Facebook, Instagram, Threads, X, BlueSky, TikTok and YouTube.