WHAT WAS CLAIMED
The Australian government is introducing a bill to seize underutilised private property.
OUR VERDICT
False. No such bill exists.
AAP FACTCHECK - The Australian government has not proposed a bill enabling it to seize senior citizens' homes, despite claims on social media.
The claim is based on a fabricated piece of legislation and appears to be based on a video created with artificial intelligence (AI).
A widely shared Facebook video posted on February 4 shows a man describing the supposed law.
"The Australian government is planning to take senior citizens' homes from July 2026, this year," he says.
"Under the Housing Reform Bill, [if] the home is now deemed underutilised, you'll have to sell it back to the government or it'll be forced to be under seizure."
The bill contains a "property efficiency clause" which means the government can determine if the property meets current efficiency standards, he says.
Property owners over the age of 65 who refuse seizure proceedings can have their pension cut off or reduced, the video claims.
"This is happening. Look it up under the Housing Reform Bill," it ends.
The claim appears to be based on information in a January 18 YouTube video from a channel named Australia Rising.
This video, which has more than 22,000 views, instead refers to a "2026 Property Reform Act" but the description of the legislation is the same.
"This property efficiency clause gives the government the authority to reclaim or repurpose private residential properties that are deemed underutilised," it claims.
"... if you're a senior citizen living alone in a home with more than one bedroom, your property could be flagged."
A disclaimer in the video's description says it was made with altered or synthetic content.
There is no evidence the federal government has proposed a Housing Reform Bill or passed a Property Reform Act.
A spokesperson for Minister for Housing Clare O'Neil confirmed to AAP FactCheck that the claims are false.
There is no legislation as described in the posts and the government is not looking at or planning to seize homes, they said.
A list of current bills in all state and territory parliaments shows no legislation under these names or laws that could allow governments to seize "underutilised" property.
The YouTube channel has posted more than100 videos, with many based on false claims about the government or new laws being introduced.
AAP FactCheck debunked claims in another video from Australia Rising about 10 new laws targeting senior Australians.
AAP FactCheck is an accredited member of the International Fact-Checking Network. To keep up with our latest fact checks, follow us on Facebook, Instagram, Threads, X, BlueSky, TikTok and YouTube.